We Begin this newsour in Gaza where
pressure is mounting on both Israel and
Egypt to reopen The crucial Raa border
crossing while talks are expected in
Cairo between Egypt the US and Israel
hundreds of a trucks are stuck in Egypt
and for weeks now Food Supplies have
been rotting in the sun after Israel
took control of the crossing last month
and with Aid unable to reach Gaza the
humanitarian situation is worsening for
thousands of able Palestinians control
over border crossings especially Rafa
has been a sticking point in ceasefire
talks Muhammad Val begins our
coverage the raah border crossing is
gaza's only point of access by land that
doesn't pass through
Israel for the Palestinians it's a vital
economic and humanitarian Lifeline but
it's also a symbol of freedom and
sovereignty Israel has controlled it
directly or indirectly since
1967 if when it announced its forces
were leaving Gaza in 2005 the movement
of goods and people through the crossing
remained subject to Israeli approval
under international law controlling the
borders of a territory is considered an
occupation and Palestinians argue that
the occupation is the reason they're in
conflict with Israel earlier last month
the Israeli Army took direct military
control of the Raa Crossing Israel says
it was a necessary part of its prep
preperations for a fullscale invasion of
the city of Rafa in a final bid to
defeat Hamas and other resistance groups
the move further complicated efforts to
bring desperately needed humanitarian
Aid into Gaza and allow people requiring
emergency medical care to be evacuated
outside the besieged strip wfp is
calling for all border crossings and
Crossing points within Gaza to be open
um as the Israeli incursion in Rafa
continues to have a devastating impact
on civilians and our own humanitarian
operations our friends at the world food
program warned that there is little the
agency can currently do in Rafa with
stocks very low and Mobility severely
restricted the UN the US and Egypt have
been pushing for the immediate reopening
of the Rafa Karam Abu Salam Crossings
the latter at the Southeastern tip of
the Gaza Strip is mainly used by trucks
carrying humanitarian Aid it's fully
under Israeli control a key focus of
current ceasefire talks is deciding the
future status of the Rah Crossing Egypt
insists Palestinians should control it
Israel's adamant Hamas and other
resistance groups should never be
allowed to be in charge claiming they
could use it to smuggle in
weapons while efforts to start ceasefire
talks continue Palestinians say the
restoration of life in Gaza will be
impossible without the Israeli blockade
being lifted Muhammad Val Al jazer
and T abazo joins us now live from in
central Gaza T what impact has the
closing of the crossing had on
Palestinians in the
South well Lea the ongoing closure of
Crossing Borders as especially the vital
the Rafa Crossing has prevented the
humanitarian Aid flow into the Gaza
Strip including food water uh medical
supplies alongside with f f it means
that famine is eminent and it this is a
clear result of the Israeli military
operation in Rafa we need to remember
clearly that citizens are suffering from
severe levels of malnutrition alongside
with food insecurity and that is
absolutely contradictory to the
international humanitarian law which
stipulates that any occupying power is
responsible for securing Food Supplies
and even securing the needs of the uh
the occupied Nation as well as the
Israeli ongoing uh control of these
borders have also brought negative
impact on the ability of onor and
humanitarian organizations to keep
operating on the ground specifically
that they prevented any kind of Aid to
get into this strip and then recently
established floating dock did not
sufficiently and effectively worked
within the past uh period specifically
that a very limited numbers of
humanitarian at TRS had entered the Gaza
Strip and that that are completely
loaded with food supplies that can't
match the ence's needs of gaza's
population in light of this ongoing
control uh the of this ongoing control
the medical sector and the Gaza Strip is
absolutely grappling and on the verge of
complete collapse due to the ongoing
revention of basic supplies entry to the
Gaza Strip and this is a systematic
military campaign that aims to
completely impose medical humanitarian
and Military Siege on more than 1.2 uh
1.5 million Palestinians across this
trip and of of course people further up
north are also in dire need of
humanitarian Aid what conditions are
Palestinians
facing well generally uh population and
people families in the north of the
strip have endured much since October
the 7th pre time of uh uh the conflict
pre October the 7th there was there was
no any kind of famine across this trip
but with the initial uh months of the
Israeli War on the Gaza STP the Israeli
War happinet has prevented any kind of
essential food water and even if fuel
supplies entry to the Gaza Strip and
that gradually had completely
deteriorated the humanitarian situation
as families there are trapped under the
Israeli fire they have been internally
displaced multiple times and now ending
up living in evacuation centers that was
already raided and invaded by the
Israeli Army in Western areas of Gaza
Strip they are as we have been talking
to locals there they have been
confirming that they are struggling to
get food as the dition of food stocks
started to uh take place in the north of
this strip alongside that they are also
grumling with finding pure sources of
water due to the destruction of water
wells in Northern Gaza so people there
are in a big cage it means that they
they they are unable to get the basic
supplies and at the same time if they
are not killed by the Israeli fire they
might die due to the uh ongoing
malnutrition that they are suffering
from and dehydration as well Lea
s Yen has leukemia and needs urgent
treatment
appro but Israel's war and blade on Gaza
is a stopping that his mother can only
watch as her son's condition
worsens my son s was a normal boy he was
a very good student he fell sick two
months ago I took him to the hospital
and they diagnosed him with leukemia he
can't walk and started using a
wheelchair two weeks ago he is in
constant pain we give him a dose of
morphine to relieve his pain and to let
him sleep he now lives on
painkillers Yin is also suffering from
malnutrition at Al AA Hospital in Dar
balah he's not alone there are
malnourished children everywhere here
and doctors say they can't cope there is
no food no healthy food no proper uh
health
services in all Gaza Strip this leads to
more complicated
cases the UN says children are starving
as Israel continues to block the entry
of a humanitarian Aid into Gaza
according to the UN more than 20
children have died of malnutrition in
the north alone and 31% are acutely
malnourished as a result of Israel's war
and restrictions that completely
contradict International low gazans
again are on the brink of famine as
malnutrition among Palestinians continue
to spread so fast due to the lack of all
kind of basic humanitarian and medical
supplies where disease and even
malnutrition are a deadly compination T
abaz Al jaaz darl balah
Palestine Ahmed bam is the Norwegian
Refugee council's Middle East
spokesperson and he joins us now from
Aman Jordan uh sir can you give us a
sense of just how much Aid is getting
into Gaza right
now very little very little indeed a few
hundred trucks only have made it since
since a months if I speak on behalf of
the Norwegian Refugee Council we haven't
had any supplies make it through any of
the crossings for the past month now and
we're only you know uh relying on our
ever depleting resources on the ground
uh it's it's nowhere near enough we have
had big promises that have also you know
uh Promises of of more Aid Promises of
safety for for our uh age workers which
my team in Gaza describe as a big
fallacy uh and of course the closure of
the nine uh uh possible potential
Crossings is is a catastrophe as you
have heard from your reporters and of
course as we he we hear on a daily basis
from our teams that uh you know children
are sleeping on the Sands because
there's no tents left they are drinking
uh you know unsafe water all day long
and they are eating very very very
little now um facts on the ground are
dire as you've just outlined and as we
have been reporting should the ra border
crossing open do conditions in Gaza even
allow for the safe distribution of Aid
and for for the safety of Aid workers
uh the short answer is no and I'm going
to illustrate it in a in a few examples
of what a delivery looks like on the
ground I mean Israel obviously takes
forever to inspect trucks it takes
forever to let trucks in but even when
the trucks are in we don't have fuel to
go and bring these trucks into into Gaza
if we had the fuel we don't have the
cash because of the liquidity shortage
on the ground to pay for these trucks
and let's say we have paid we have found
the cash it's not safe to take these
trucks from point A by The Crossing to
point B where our houses where houses
are so it's it's it's an obstacle course
as my colleagues describe it on the
ground it's not just one factor it's not
a straightforward process anymore you
are working under the bombs under the
Rockets you know in dangerous very
dangerous roads you are basically as an
aid worker just like the rest of the
population
putting your life uh on the line here
and people have been putting their lives
on the line to go find some bread or
some water so the short answer is no big
promises should stop and we should see
concrete action concrete action means
Israel pulling out of of these civilian
areas in Rafa letting Aid trucks in
opening all Gates possible to to let uh
you know these trucks in and of course
uh very important to allow uh a workers
to work in the safest environment
possible but if there is no Rack or
change in in Israel's uh policy what
would that
mean um for for Aid trucks and for for
Aid flow it means it means yeah you know
we are working in atrocious
circumstances it's not possible I can't
see how you know we have to make these
Journeys back and forth 18 miles I think
it is from the Rafa Crossing to to to
kanun or to masasi where AID you know
Aid operations are are focused and
concentrated right now um pressure has
to come from Israel's allies and and
from these talks and and other talks
behind closed doors I mean rhetoric
empty rhetoric really doesn't doesn't
work anymore we need action and that
action should come from from these big
allies of Israel who have been you know
trying you know we we've heard
you know all good rhetoric but very very
little action whether that is on on a
route or whether that is on our on the
safety of our teams I think Time for
Action is is now and that could only
work if Israel stops attacking Raa had
let these populations back to where to
where they have been receiving aid you
know these these months Ahad a Middle
East spokesperson at the Norwegian
Refugee Council thank you sir for your
time
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from aler